abstract . 
block chaining technology is a distributed infrastructure and computing paradigm .  the latest version is represented by the super account book .  the latest version is block chain 3 .  from the perspective of large data ,  this paper systematically combs the essence and core technology of block chain technology ,  and expounds the application status of block chain technology in accounting industry .  this paper focuses on building an irreversible distributed financial system based on large data in the context of large data in order to apply the scenario of "block chain technology + accounting services" to the accounting industry ,  and prospects the application of block chain storage technology and intelligent internet of things technology based on large data ,  providing inspiration for future research . 
introductions
block chain ,  as the underlying technology of bitcoin ,  has entered the public eye .  block chain is a distributed book composed of data blocks based on cryptography .  each block contains a large amount of transaction information to verify the validity of the information .  the prominent advantage of block chain technology lies in the decentralized design .  block chain system consists of a large number of nodes to form a point-to-point network .  there is no centralized hardware or management mechanism .  the rights and obligations of any node are equal .  the data in the system is maintained by all nodes ,  and they are independent of each other .  by using asymmetric encryption technology ,  timestamp ,  merkle tree ,  consensus mechanism and incentive mechanism ,  point-to-point transactions based on decentralized credit are implemented in independent node distributed networks .  because of the high reliability and safety ,  low cost and high efficiency of decentralization ,  the problems of centralization are solved .  block chain is not only a technological innovation ,  but also the opening of an era .  block chains make the big data more accurate ,  while big data make the data of block chain more valuable .  the block chain can make the big data flow more safely and ensure the privacy of data .  it is also an unusurpable data storage technology ,  provides a traceable path of data ,  and establishes a trusted data assets trading environment .  considering the impact of block chains on accounting from the perspective of large data ensures the high security of accounting and the unalterable and traceability of data ,  which is conducive to the establishment of a new financial accounting system and sharing system . 

section ii . the core technology of block chain
a .  distributed accounting method
distributed accounting is a decentralized and decentralized accounting method .  transaction accounting is composed of nodes operating in different areas ,  and each node will make its information public ,  so that everyone can see ,  can supervise each other ,  improve the legitimacy of transactions .  the database records the information of all traders ,  and everyone can make changes to the information ,  and the updated content is made public so that other participants can see it ,  and all participants can access the information publicly . 

b .  asymmetric encryption and authorization technology
in order to ensure the security of the transaction information ,  it is necessary to encrypt the information .  in general ,  it is encrypted with a public key and a private key ,  and encrypted with a secret key ,  it needs to be decrypted with another secret key ,  for example ,  encrypted with a public key and decrypted with a private key .  public key generation is irreversible ,  that is ,  the private key can not be deduced from the public key ,  only the decryptor can see ,  thus ensuring a high degree of confidentiality of information . 

c .  consensus mechanism
traders form a consensus through the pow ,  pos ,  dpos ,  pool mechanism to judge the accuracy of a message ,  which can not only confirm the information but also prevent information from being tampered with ,  to achieve the balance of efficiency and security . 

d .  smart contracts
intelligent contracts are self-executable contracts that not only execute the plan ,  but also manage the plan and its day-to-day work and transaction costs .  in the taifang system ,  there are a variety of projects ,  some may become alternatives to the stock market ,  some may become a new democratic model ,  in which politicians will be more accountable to citizens .  in the sector chain accounting industry ,  it is not only the processing and accounting of accounts ,  but also the analysis and collation of financial data . 

e .  block chain core algorithm
pow is the abbreviation of english proof of work .  pow has the following requirements for the format of the block b submitted by the node . 
h(b)=target
view sourceright-click on figure for mathml and additional features . 

where h is a hash algorithm ,  target is a fixed number .  that is ,  the hash value of the whole block is less than a given number target .  only when the block meets this condition is a legitimate block ,  which can be accepted by other nodes .  and when a node finds such a legitimate block ,  it is also this also solves the decision-making problem of results without center and multi-node .  the whole network uses the data of the first node to find the legitimate block . 

the hash value generated by the hash function is random ,  and a small change to the original data can make the hash value completely different from the previous one .  you can start accumulating from 1 . 

the value of the target is automatically adjusted at intervals to ensure that the block generation time is basically fixed ,  such as the bitcoin guarantees that a new block will be generated every 10 minutes .  the probability of blocks is . 
targethashmax
view sourceright-click on figure for mathml and additional features . 

from this formula ,  we can see that the smaller the target ,  the smaller the probability that each attempt will find a legitimate block .  in bitcoin ,  the target value is adjusted every 2 , 2016 pieces (two weeks) by the following formula . 
targetnew=t20162weeks*target
view sourceright-click on figure for mathml and additional features . t2016represents the time it takes to generate the first 2016 blocks .  the shorter the time it takes ,  the smaller the final target value .  the difficulty of building blocks can also be determined by the following formula . 
dificulty=target1currenttarget
view sourceright-click on figure for mathml and additional features . 

section iii . application of block chain technology in accounting
a .  application status of block chain technology in accounting industry
with the further development of the block chain ,  its application field has developed from the initial digital currency to a deeper direction .  in december 2016 ,  the state council issued the “thirteenth five-year plan” for national informationization .  in this plan ,  the research of block chain technology will be brought into the national plan for the first time in china ,  which shows the important position of block chain technology in today's society .  as of january 2018 ,  there are not many achievements in the application of the block chain ,  and the related intellectual property rights and patents are blank .  the block chain field is showing the development trend driven by technological and industrial innovation .  deloitte encrypted monetary community ,  a group founded in 2014 ,  has distributed members around the world to focus on the use of block chains in the accounting industry .  after professional training of these members ,  deloitte has made full use of block chain timestamps to ensure transaction time standards in auditing operations .  confirmation ,  using hash function to ensure that it can not be tampered with modification ,  through merkle to ensure the integrity of audit information ,  through asymmetric encryption technology to ensure that the data is open and transparent .  another company dedicated to block-chain technology and accounting is san francisco subledger ,  which provides businesses with a scalable ,  block-chain-based ,  dual-entry accounting book scheme that delivers real-time financial and performance data . 

b .  construction of irreversible distributed financial system based on big data
block chains are run entirely by the public themselves .  the connection of individual nodes can provide the huge computational power needed for computing .  there is no control of central nodes in the network .  block chains can be used to build a new computational model - block chains as a service .  therefore ,  future large data can be built directly on the public block chain ,  and platform services can be provided directly on this public cloud .  this mode can be called public chain as a service .  block chains can also be private or regional .  private chains or alliance chains are mainly used in enterprises or organizations ,  and local decentralized block chains are built through a limited number of hosts or distributed data centers . 

developing distributed applications running on block chains or creating a new block chain requires a lot of manual development and powerful background computing capabilities to build and maintain distributed infrastructure .  block chain as a service (bcs) can provide a large data infrastructure platform with a variety of developer tools by combining platform as a service ,  which makes it easier for users to develop block chain applications and greatly reduces the development effort .  security .  also can only combine infrastructure as a service ,  giving users the maximum development space to design their own block chain ,  large data services only provide the block chain infrastructure . 

block chain as a service (bcs) transforms the infrastructure of large data and cloud computing ,  liberating closed data services and cloud computing infrastructure ,  allowing the public to operate their own infrastructure and provide rich distributed system features .  based on this ,  through the enterprise internal process reengineering ,  the block chain storage technology based on large data + intelligent internet of things + distributed financial accounting system (as shown in figure 1) will be an important application of accounting information and intelligence in the future .  distributed bookkeeping based on block chain technology is a network of bookkeeping organizations formed under the technical rules of block chain .  the bookkeeping uses encryption computer algorithm-hash algorithm and collaborative maintenance to carry out digital distributed bookkeeping ,  while allowing users of multiple sites in different geographical locations to trade ,  assets and other wisdom .  and it an share database . 

figure 1
figure .  1
block chain storage technology based on big data + intelligent internet of things + distributed financial accounting system

view all

in the specific operation ,  because of the characteristics of the block chain ,  an enterprise can establish an open and transparent enterprise financial system when it establishes an account book .  by guaranteeing the openness of financial information ,  it is conducive to the examination and examination of enterprise financial information from all walks of life ,  and only the private key can verify and share sensitive information .  the security of enterprise secrets .  the characteristics of block chain timestamp can ensure the accuracy of each transaction time ,  thus can not change the time point ,  ensure that financial information can not be tampered with ,  but also reduce the difficulty of audit .  the essence of distributed accounting is a digital transaction record database based on a particular network (open or closed network) ,  which contains all transaction information of all participants in that particular network .  under the application of block chain technology ,  these transaction information can be tampered with ,  comprehensive and traceable .  every transaction participant can see all the information of the transaction and its real-time updated data situation ,  prevent the trader to do the data already completed by others ,  thus reducing the repeatability ,  avoiding the trader's waste of time and calculation ,  and need the agreement of all traders in the whole network before the information can be changed .  it guarantees the safety and correctness of the system and reduces the financial risk .  block chain technology realizes the openness and transparency of the books ,  which not only ensures the safety and accuracy of the information and assets of the books ,  but also reduces the financial risks and transaction costs . 

section iv . conclusions
the application of block chain technology has been increasing and the research level has been escalating .  under the application technology of block chain ,  value creation and transmission can be realized ,  so as to participate in its business .  block chain storage technology based on large data + intelligent internet of things + distributed financial accounting financial system is the inevitable trend of block chain technology landing in the field of financial accounting in the future .  however ,  the block chain does not completely solve the security of financial information ,  it can not be tampered with ,  if the node grasps more than 51 % of the computing power of the whole network will be able to tamper with and forge data ,  as well as the trust of partners ,  security is based on a large number of trusted nodes .  block chain security vulnerabilities are still an important factor in distributed accounting and other applications .  if the security problem can not be solved ,  the actual benefits of block chain industry may be affected .  only by enhancing the consciousness of the bottom technology of the block chain ,  establishing some relevant rules and regulations ,  combining the block chain infrastructure with the depth of law ,  and combining with the internet artificial intelligence ,  can the block chain technology develop healthily in the accounting industry ,  promote the security of financial information and can not be tampered with .  with the maturity and development of block chain technology ,  the related problems which restrict its application in the field of accounting and finance will be solved .  i believe that block chain technology will be further developed in the field of accounting and finance . 
resource .  s .  liu and s .  he ,  "application of block chaining technology in finance and accounting field , " 2019 international conference on intelligent transportation ,  big data & smart city (icitbs) ,  changsha ,  china ,  2019 ,  pp .  342-344 . 